---
title: GSoC 2026 @ The Rust Foundation
categories: [gsoc 2026]
tags: [gsoc, rust, rustc, offload]
---

# A Frontend for Safe GPU Offloading in Rust

## Basic Information
- Name: Marcelo Dominguez
- Github: [https://github.com/sa4dus](https://github.com/sa4dus)
- Email: [dmmarcelo27@gmail.com](mailto:dmmarcelo27@gmail.com)
- LinkedIn: [https://www.linkedin.com/in/dmmarcelo](https://www.linkedin.com/in/dmmarcelo)
- Location: Madrid, Spain (UTC+1:00)
- Mentor: [Manuel Drehwald (@ZuseZ4)](https://github.com/ZuseZ4)

## About me
I am a 4th year Mathematics and Software Engineering student. GSoC2025@TheRustFoundation contributor working on `autodiff` feature. Right now I'm contributing on `offload` feature.

## Contributions
**rust-lang/rust:** https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pulls?q=is%3Apr+author%3ASa4dUs
**GSoC 2025 Project:** https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/archive/2025/projects/USQvru7i

## Project Details
**Size:** Large

### Abstract
The `offload` feature is currently working on the Rust compiler but still there's no safe and user-friendly interface. Right now, the only way to use it is via the `offload` intrinsic, which is discouraged for general use. The goal of this project is to build an ergonomic frontend around a function-like macro and safe abstractions to make offloading accessible and memory safe.

### Primary Goals
- Design an `offload!` macro that simplifies kernel launching on arbitrary devices.
- Ensure no mutable aliasing across device threads via disjoint memory partitioning.
- Provide an abstraction for device selection.
- Define a clear and explicit model for host-to-device data transfer via `Device<T>`.

### Secondary Goals
- Support shared memory programming through `Shared<T>` abstraction.
- Offer composable partitioning strategies for common pararell indexing patterns.

### Constraints
- The frontend should not introduce performance overhead over the raw intrinsic.
- While being safe, this frontend should limit as little as possible to the user.
- Abstractions must not assume device architecture.

### Technical Approach

#### Expose device selection
Device management is exposed as a safe wrapper over LLVM intrinsics such as:
- `__tgt_rtl_number_of_devices()` 
- `__tgt_rtl_init_device`

The API design will look something like:

```rust
struct OffloadDevice { ... }

OffloadDevice::all();
OffloadDevice::host();
OffloadDevice::from_index(idx);

impl Default for OffloadDevice { .. }
```

Note that `OffloadDevice::default` is well defined, as we can always assume the existence of at least the host device.

#### The `offload!` Macro
The core of the frontend is a declarative macro that handles the boilerplate of capturing variables and calling the intrinsic.

```rust
// Proposed general syntax
offload!(
    device=D,
    grid=G,
    block=B,
    kernel=K(..args)
);
```

Instead of reconstructing or duplicating the kernel definition, the macro only takes a reference to an already defined kernel function marked with the `offload_kernel` attribute, which makes a function eligible for offloading.
```rust
#[offload_kernel]
fn K(..args) { .. }
```

which will expand to:

```rust
#[cfg(host)]
extern "C" fn K(..args);

#[cfg(device)]
extern "gpu-kernel" fn K(..args) { .. };
```

The `offload!` macro expansion then generates the host-side call of the intrinsic.
```rust
unsafe {
    ::core::intrinsics::offload(
        D,
        G,
        B,
        K,
        (..args)
    )
}
```

As this can lead to verbose invocations, some parameters can be optional and will use a default value instead.
```rust
offload!(
    grid=G,
    kernel=K(..)
);
```

#### Type-check information
Given our current intrinsic, you can pass incorrect types as args (`*const T` instead of `*mut T`) and the return type cannot inferred by the compiler, see [zulip](https://rust-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/channel/182449-t-compiler.2Fhelp/topic/.E2.9C.94.20Inferring.20return.20type.20from.20a.20function.20passed.20to.20an.20intr.2E.2E.2E). We cannot use traits like `FnOnce` to infer the return type of the intrinsic, which should be the same as the kernel's return type.

Right now, our `offload` intrinsic is defined as:
```rust
pub const fn offload<F, T: crate::marker::Tuple, R>(f: F, args: T) -> R;
```
since we want to accept the most arbitrary form of a kernel `f`, we cannot use `FnOnce` like traits, so we should aim for a solution at typecheck level.

#### Wrapper for device types
To support passing host data to kernels while maintaining memory safety, we introduce `Device<T>`. An opaque type to handle memory for the target device.

For now, as there are no clear rules about it, we'll not define or expose any host-to-device conversion logic. If a type's memory representation is not valid in the device, it won't be supported for now.

Only types that are device-safe (see next section) are eligible for transfer into device memory (see next section).

`Device<T>` would look something like:
```rust
struct Device<T> {
    ptr: *mut T,
}
```

This type can be also useful when calling multiple CuBLAS/CuDNN functions, omitting the memory transfers in between kernels. This would provide great performance improvements.

#### Device-safe types
Define an `OffloadSafe` marker trait. This trait ensures a type `T` is device-safe.

```rust
trait OffloadSafe {}
```

It's pre-implemented for primitive types and those ones that we can ensure safety for
```rust
impl<T, const N: usize> OffloadSafe for [T; N]
impl<T> OffloadSafe for [T]
impl<T: OffloadSafe> OffloadSafe for &T
impl<T: OffloadSafe> OffloadSafe for &mut T
```

It would be ideal to have automatic derivation, but padding in struct can be a problem.

The offload macro will use trait bounds in its expanded code to trigger compile-time error if a user tries to offload an incompatible type.

If a type `T` implements `Clone`, it is assumed to be safely duplicable in host memory, and therefore, eligible for implicit transfer into device memory. Any `T: Clone` is considered implicitly `OffloadSafe` for `offload!`, even without an explicit implementation.

As an alternative design, this check could also be moved entirely to a compiler-internal check by recursively visiting and validating argument types.

This would simplify the implementation and reduce the trait-system complexity but would produce less user-friendly errors.

#### Pararell Index Patterns
To guarantee memory safety across threads, execution is modeled as disjoint memory partitioning.

Each kernel is associated with a partitioning strategy that defines how input data is split into non-overlapping regions, each assigned to a single thread. Formally:

$$
\forall i \neq j: R_i \cap R_j = \emptyset
$$

where $R_i$ is the memory region assigned to thread $i$.

This allows us to ensure no mutable aliasing across threads and no data race by construction (assuming correct pattern implementation).

A region is defined as:
```rust
enum Region<'a, T> {
    Element(&'a mut T),
    Slice(&'a mut [T]),
}
```

Not all `OffloadSafe` types admit safe partitioning. While `OffloadSafe` guarantees valid device memory representation, partitioning additionally requires an indexable and alias-free access model.

We introduce a second marker trait to distinguish types that can be safely partitioned across threads:

```rust
/// SAFETY:
/// - no aliasing between elements
/// - safe to split into disjoint mutable regions
trait Partitionable {}
```

This trait is stricter that `OffloadSafe`. Only structurally safe containers are partitionable by default:

```rust
impl<T: OffloadSafe> Partitionable for [T] {}
impl<T: OffloadSafe, const N: usize> Partitionable for [T; N] {}
```

To define how threads map to memory regions, we can define partitioning strategies.
```rust
trait PartitioningStrategy {
    type Region<'a, T>: 'a;

    fn assign<'a, T>(
        &self,
        thread_idx: (usize, usize, usize),
        block_idx: (usize, usize, usize),
        block_size: (usize, usize, usize),
        grid_size: (usize, usize, usize),
        data: &'a mut [T],
    ) -> Option<Self::Region<'a, T>>;
}
```

For example, a simple 1-dimensional linear indexing (pseudocode):
```rust
struct Linear1D;

impl PartitioningStrategy for Linear1D {
    type Region<T> = Option<&mut T>;

    fn assign_region<T>(...) -> Self::Region<T> {
        let i = compute_linear(thread_idx, block, grid);

        if i < data_len {
            Some(get_element(i))
        } else {
            None
        }
    }
}
```

Some common patterns will be already provided to the user, some of them are:

| Pattern        | Value |
|----------------|-------|
| `Linear1D`     | $i = b_x \cdot bs_x + t_x$ |
| `GridStride1D` | $i = (b_x \cdot bs_x + t_x) + k \cdot (gs_x \cdot bs_x)$ |
| `Linear2D`     | $i = (b_y \cdot bs_y + t_y) \cdot W + (b_x \cdot bs_x + t_x)$ |

Where $gs_x, bs_\xi, b_\xi, t_\xi$ are the grid size, block size, block index and thread index in the $\xi$ axis.

#### Shared Memory Model
There's currently a [Tracking Issue for NVPTX shared memory #135516](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/135516)
and an open [PR](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/146181) for introducing support for dynamic shared memory. The design space is still evolving.

If dynamic shared memory support is available during the project the frontend will use `gpu_launch_sized_workgroup_mem` to expose this (more design details will be discussed in Community Bonding Period). For statis shared memory, integration will depend on the state once we are in the coding period. If it hasn't been implemented yet, I'm happy to help on it as part of the project.

Synchronization gpu primitives NVIDIA `syncthreads` and AMD `barrier` may be exposed on a thin wrapper.

#### For advanced users
Besides from the safe abstraction, the frontend will also provive an unsafe macro which would bypass some of the safety checks so users can have full control in case they need it.

#### Documentation and testing
All the features above will require proper tests and documentation, this will also be an important part of the project.

### Deliverables
- **Midterm Evaluation**: device selection, wrapper types and offload-safe and at least one `PartitioningStrategy` working. The frontend should be usable in a subset of cases without `offload!` macro layer.
- **Final Evaluation**: fully functional `offload!` macro integrating all components, tested and documented.

### Project Timeline
#### Community Bonding Period
Refine the exact design of the frontend and core details and validate it with the mentor. Key design questions, especially around device-safe type validation and shared memory abstractions will be discussed with Rust community.

#### Week 1
Implement `OffloadDevice` using `__tgt_rtl_*` intrinsics.

#### Week 2
Implement `Device<T>` and an initial approach for `T: Clone` types.

#### Week 3
Define and implement `

` for primitive types, slices, arrays and references.

#### Week 4
Typecheck for `offload` intrinsic's return type and args mutability.

#### Week 5
Define and implement `Partitionable` and `Region` with the required safety constraints.

#### Week 6
Implement `PartitioningStrategy` and `Linear1D` strategy with correct index computation and region assignment and run full kernel end-to-end without the macro layer (Midterm evaluation).

#### Week 7
Implement parsing logic for `offload!` macro.

#### Week 8
Implement macro expansion to the intrnisic call and generated function wrappers.

#### Week 9
Compile-time checks to enforce `OffloadSafe` on arguments. 

#### Week 10
Integrate partitioning in the macro execution flow.

#### Week 11
Implement shared memory using previous design discussions.

#### Week 12
Add an `offload_unsafe!` macro as a thin wrapper over the intrinsic.

#### Final Week
Write docs and prepare complete end-to-end demo for final submission.
