---
title: GSoC 2025 @ The Rust Foundation
categories: [gsoc 2025]
tags: [gsoc, rust, rustc, autodiff]
---

Welcome to my GSoC 2025 journey with the Rust Foundation. This page serves as the central hub to track my progress throughout the program.

## About the Project

**Project:** ABI/Layout handling for the automatic differentiation feature

### Overview

Over the last year, support for automatic differentiation ("autodiff") has been added to the Rust compiler using Enzyme, an LLVM-IR based tool. However, two main layout-related issues limit its effectiveness:

Rust’s compiler performs ABI optimizations that improve performance but hinder Enzyme’s autodiff. For example, a function like `fn foo(a: f32, b: f32) -> f32` might be optimized to `fn foo(x: i64) -> f32` internally. While valid at the LLVM level, this transformation complicates differentiation. Functions tagged with `#[rustc_autodiff]` should avoid these ABI optimizations to ensure correct autodiff behavior without disabling optimizations globally.

### Expected Outcome

- Prevent ABI optimizations on functions marked with `#[rustc_autodiff]`.
- Enable the `#[autodiff(..)]` attribute to work correctly on functions with most common and complex headers.
- Maintain performance for functions without the `#[rustc_autodiff]` attribute.
- Add robust test cases to the Rust compiler test suite.
- Fix frontend parsing bugs if they arise during testing.

### Useful Links

- [Project Proposal (current)](/posts/gsoc2025-proposal)  
- [GSoC 2025 Rust selected projects](https://github.com/rust-lang/google-summer-of-code/blob/main/gsoc/runs/2025.md)
- [Google Summer of Code project annotation](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/programs/2025/projects/USQvru7i)  
- [Project Discussion on Rust Zulip](https://rust-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/channel/421156-gsoc/topic/Project.3A.20ABI.2FLayout.20handling.20for.20autodiff/with/516963958)  
- [Automatic Differentiation Working Group](https://rust-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/channel/390790-wg-autodiff) 

---

## Pre-Selection Period

Before official coding started, I worked on foundational tasks and smaller improvements to get familiar with compiler internals and the autodiff feature.

- [Prevent ICE in autodiff return activity validation](/posts/prevent-ice/)

---

## Community Bonding Period

During the Community Bonding Period, I engage with mentors and contributors, refine the project scope, review the codebase, and analyze optimizations related to the `#[autodiff]` attribute.

---

## Coding Period

`todo!()`

---

## Final Reflections and Outcomes

`todo!()`